Once around the North America Nebula,
North America Nebula is a fantastic
object to track down if you get the
chance. Uh you need quite a wide field
of view though. It's a glowing region of
gas uh with obscuring dust lanes in it
and a lot of detail up there just to the
left of the bright star Denb in the
constellation of Signis. the Swan inset
in the green rectangle there. And it is
called the North American Nebula because
of that fairly obvious shape which seems
to m mirror the outline of the
continent.
But it's huge, 10 times the area of the
full moon. So if you try and use a
normal telescope with this, you're going
to drill right inside it and not
actually get the vista of the whole
thing. It was first recorded by that
man, William Herschel, top right there.
Um, and cataloged by his son John in the
new general catalog as NGC7000.
So, a very easy reference to remember
there.
Too faint to see by eye, but again, with
binoculars or a telescope with a really
wide field of view, 3 degrees is a very
wide field. Um, you can get the most
fantastic images. I've taken pictures of
it using a short uh lens on a camera.
So, a sort of 50 millimeter camera lens
or a 70 millimeter camera lens is
probably about right for doing this
mounted piggyback on my tracking
telescope. And you get the most
fantastic images showing all that
glowing gas and the great gulf there and
the bit that's representing Mexico and
Florida and so forth. and then the uh
dark lane between it and the next door
nebula.
So, it's part of an ionized cloud of uh
hydrogen gas glowing away because it's
illuminated by strong radiation from a
bright star. And in this image, we've
just zoomed in enough you can really see
the dark dust lane center of the image
there in a sort of cross shape
separating the North American Nebula top
left from the other part lower right
which is called the Pelican Nebula that
is actually just part of the same uh
cloud of glowing hydrogen. the uh dust
lane in in the middle there is carving
them into is again is another photograph
of IC5070
uh the Pelican Nebula. And why it's
called the Pelican Nebula, I have no
idea because I cannot see a Pelican.
Perhaps somebody can uh work out how to
make a Pelican out of that for me. Um so
quite fascinating to look at. This is a
highresolution Hubble Space Telescope
picture which is absolutely marvelous in
terms of detail of the uh borders of the
Central America Mexico region of what's
called the Signis wall. Uh so you can
really see how that's the boundary
between the darker regions um where the
face of the denser material is being lit
up from the top right hand corner of the
image there as the radiation is
streaming out from underneath the
intervening dark cloud at the top there
and then hitting the dense region and
lighting up that wall of glowing gas.
Now, in terms of distance, these nebula
are very difficult to pin down. There's
really precious little to lock onto in
ordinary circumstances. And so, until
2020, the estimates of the range to a
North American nebula were anything from
1500 to 3,000 light years, factor of two
uncertainty.
But Gia, the space telescope was able to
obtain images of about 400 faint stars
that lie within the nebula. And on that
basis, we can now tell that the distance
is 25,590
light years. So towards the upper end of
the earlier estimates. And now that we
know the distance, we can of course from
the angular size tell that it's 140
light years in diameter. This immense
cloud of gas.
Now, there was a little bit of a mystery
to this one, which was what is the star
that is illuminating it all? Why is all
this gas glowing? Well, it's because of
ultraviolet high energy radiation from a
very hot star. And Edwin Hubble
suggested that the bright star Denb
nearby, which looks very bright to us
and indeed is quite a powerful star, um
it's uh around about 1,600 light years
away and that's too near. It's 1,000
light years from the nebula, so doesn't
really work. And also, it turned out
that before we knew the distances, we
could tell it wasn't right because Denb
is hot at 8,500 Kelvin, so much hotter
than the sun. But it's not hot enough.
The radiation that's causing all this
gas to glow must be coming from a star
with a temperature of at least 30,000
Kelvin. So much hotter than Denb. And uh
that's really contributing to the output
being largely in the ultraviolet part of
the spectrum in order to create this
vast region of ionized hydrogen.
And in 2004, a search was carried out
using data from the two mass survey
within that orange circle, roughly
centered because whatever's doing this,
you can tell by the distribution of
light that it needs to be somewhere near
the center of this vast region and
actually probably behind the dark dust
cloud that's uh obscuring whatever it is
that's releasing all of these
uh high energy photons across such a
wide area
and the survey was able to discover this
star which is J205551.3
plus 43
or the Bahama star as it's much more
easy to say um and is located roughly
where the Bahamas would be if that was
North America on a app. So, it makes
sense. So, it's right slap bang behind
the center of the thick part of the dust
cloud, the cloud called L 935.
And we now know that this is a very hot
star, 40,000 Kelvin, an 03 class blue
giant star
pouring out enormous amounts of
radiation. and we can't see it very well
because of that dust cloud. But we can
detect it at a magnitude of 13.2. So
actually not that difficult to find with
really serious equipment. Probably
beyond most amateur telescopes though
unless you have particularly large
aperture and a good observing site, it's
going to be hard to pin it down. There
are lots of other candidate bright stars
marked by those yellow crosses. um all
over the map there. But the one with the
blue cross in the center has been
identified as being the culprit, the
powerhouse star that is illuminating all
this material.
And we also found that there is a strong
radio emission from the nebula. Uh the
radio emitter goes by the name W80 from
a catalog of such things. And it seems
to be coming from all over the nebula.
Um it's a little bit of a mystery as to
exactly what is causing all of this. But
in the process of surveying it and
surveying the cloud and the looking for
the main star somewhere in that blue
ellipse on the right. That's the W80
bubble. So the emitter is in that region
again possibly obscured from our line of
sight by the cloud. And just to add to
it, all those little yellow dots are
young proto stars that have been formed
within the nebula. So this has been a
prodigious source of new star formation
within the galaxy. And talking of the
whole of the galaxy, this is an X-ray
composite image across the whole of the
night sky with the plane of the Milky
Way running across the center. And over
to the left, halfway from the center to
the edge, that's where we have the
bright blue star Denb that we can see
and the North America Nebula, the
Pelican Nebula, and other glowing
material in and around the constellation
of Signis. Now, it's not the nebula
that's giving off the X-rays. It's the
powerful sources of intense radiation
that are the accretion disc of black
holes or material falling into um the
grip of neutron stars and so forth. Uh
supernovi things like that that are
giving off the intense radiation rather
than the nebula itself. The nebula is
mostly cold and therefore gives off most
of its radiation in the infrared part of
the spectrum. Um, but uh there's
certainly a lot of activity probably
obscured by the dust clouds of the
Signis Rift running along the central
plane of the galaxy there. So, I hope
you enjoyed that whistle stop tour once
around the North American Nebula and
thanks very much for listening and we'll
see you on the next one.